[Guest]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: A few days ago, I woke up and found that I was not on my bed.
[Amit Varma]: No, instead I was curled up in what appeared to be a box.
[Amit Varma]: I was curled up like a little kitten inside this box and the top was closed and the bottom
[Amit Varma]: was closed and three sides were closed.
[Amit Varma]: And on one side, just one side, there was a window with thick transparent glass.
[Amit Varma]: I blinked a few times and peered out through this window.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other side, I saw a family of four sitting in a living room, staring at me.
[Amit Varma]: There were four of them, mummy, daddy, one boy, one girl, they were all staring at me.
[Amit Varma]: I wondered what was going on.
[Amit Varma]: I shouted, hey, help me, let me out of here.
[Amit Varma]: I'm trapped inside this box.
[Amit Varma]: The boy giggled, mummy-ji smiled, daddy-ji looked stern as if he was not amused.
[Amit Varma]: None of them moved.
[Amit Varma]: All of them kept staring at me.
[Amit Varma]: The boy reached out his grubby hand for some popcorn.
[Amit Varma]: I don't understand this, I shouted.
[Amit Varma]: I'm trapped in this box, let me out.
[Amit Varma]: How can you just watch?
[Amit Varma]: None of them moved and this time, none of them smiled also, as if this was amusing no
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: Then I noticed a mirror on the wall behind them.
[Amit Varma]: And in that mirror, I saw all of them from behind, sitting and watching a television.
[Amit Varma]: And my alarmed face was in that television.
[Amit Varma]: I was trapped inside the television.
[Amit Varma]: What the hell, I shouted, let me out of here.
[Amit Varma]: Why am I on television, I mean in television, whatever, let me out, let me out.
[Amit Varma]: I started banging on the screen of the television, from inside of course.
[Amit Varma]: Then daddy-ji got up.
[Amit Varma]: He said to his family, it is appalling, what is this nonsense?
[Amit Varma]: The quality of Indian television has become so bad.
[Amit Varma]: In saying that, he pointed the remote control at me and everything turned black.
[Amit Varma]: I lay there sobbing silently, trapped in the darkness.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: If you can hear these words, you are obviously listening to this podcast and I want to congratulate
[Amit Varma]: you for your wise choice.
[Amit Varma]: You could have been doing something worse with your time.
[Amit Varma]: You could have been watching Indian television.
[Amit Varma]: You know, all of us bemoan the quality of our television, but we often assume that it
[Amit Varma]: is a cultural issue.
[Amit Varma]: It has nothing to do with economics or government regulation.
[Amit Varma]: Well, recently I read this excellent piece in the Hindustan Times with the headline,
[Amit Varma]: Why are Indian news channels so disappointing?
[Amit Varma]: It was written by Ashok Malik and in his piece, he explained how price controls imposed by
[Amit Varma]: the government on how much channels can charge their subscribers transformed the incentives
[Amit Varma]: of the channels.
[Amit Varma]: In the case of the news channels, it led to a race to the bottom, but it affected all
[Amit Varma]: other TV programming as well.
[Amit Varma]: Children's channels, for example, ran crappy reruns instead of investing in quality indigenous
[Amit Varma]: content.
[Amit Varma]: Well, Ashok is a renowned columnist and writer.
[Amit Varma]: He won the Padma Shri last year for his journalism.
[Amit Varma]: He's currently a fellow at the Observer Research Foundation.
[Amit Varma]: Besides being a prolific columnist, I'm delighted that he's agreed to join me on the scene and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen today to discuss Indian television.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the show, Ashok.
[Guest]: Hi, Amit.
[Guest]: Looking forward to this.
[Amit Varma]: Ashok, when back in the day when you and I grew up in the 70s and 80s and so on, we got
[Amit Varma]: a lot of our knowledge about India and about our culture and so on from things like Amachitra
[Amit Varma]: Katha.
[Amit Varma]: And kids today, of course, don't read Amachitra Katha and things like that.
[Amit Varma]: They watch television all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Can they get the same kind of learnings that we did from television?
[Guest]: You know, that's a very interesting question you've touched upon.
[Guest]: And it's something which I've been thinking about for a long time because I have two young
[Guest]: children who watch a lot of television, who are inquisitive young children, but who don't
[Guest]: read as much as, say, you and I did when we were growing up.
[Guest]: And whether it's Amachitra Katha or the Nehru Bal Pustakale, we had access to a great amount
[Guest]: of published material on Indian history and heritage.
[Guest]: Not all of it was perfect, but it was still very, very useful and educative.
[Guest]: The television equivalent, frankly, does not exist.
[Guest]: In fact, today's children don't even watch Disney.
[Guest]: They watch reruns of Japanese cartoons because 30 or 20 year old Japanese cartoons are most
[Guest]: easily and inexpensively available to television studios.
[Guest]: They are imported from Japan or elsewhere and reruns of them are telecast over and over
[Guest]: again.
[Guest]: And all our kids end up watching that.
[Guest]: To run a serious, well-produced national geographic type or even semi-national geographic type
[Guest]: channel in any language in India, English or regional, depicting Indian history, culture,
[Guest]: and the richness of this country, the diversity of this country, is very, very difficult because
[Guest]: such programming costs money.
[Guest]: Such programming would require using animation and graphics, which ironically is produced
[Guest]: in India, but produced by companies that are outsourcing firms for Hollywood filmmakers.
[Guest]: But they can't do the same work in India for children's programming or heritage programming
[Guest]: for Indian television because there just isn't a market for it.
[Guest]: Channels tell you we can't recover money from our subscribers or consumers because they
[Guest]: are price caps and the market is structured in such a manner that even if I want to pay
[Guest]: a hundred rupees for a channel of this nature, I can't.
[Guest]: And so you end up getting, frankly, rubbish programming on television for children.
[Guest]: You get endless reruns of Japanese cartoons, some of which are good, some of which are
[Amit Varma]: just rubbish.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to shift for a moment from children's television, which we'll come back to and talk
[Amit Varma]: about news channels.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the reason I invited you on this show for this episode was this excellent piece
[Amit Varma]: you wrote for the Hindustan Times a few days ago, and where you spoke about how our news
[Amit Varma]: channels are now, quote, increasingly part of the entertainment economy rather than the
[Amit Varma]: information ecosystem, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd like to quote a paragraph from you just to give a sense of what that's like.
[Amit Varma]: And I think all the listeners will pretty much agree with all of this, it'll strike
[Amit Varma]: a chord.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, why are Indian news channels so astonishingly disappointing?
[Amit Varma]: They oscillate between over-the-top studio debates and relatively sober studio debates.
[Amit Varma]: There is rarely deep reportage, documentaries are practically unheard of, spending on editorial
[Amit Varma]: and news gathering scares management's, preference is given to paying some talking head a few
[Amit Varma]: thousand rupees to scream for 30 minutes.
[Amit Varma]: What is at the root of this?
[Amit Varma]: Question mark, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: And what you go on to speak about being at the root of this is, in fact, common to white
[Amit Varma]: children's television is so messed up and entertainment television is so messed up.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what I'd like you to elaborate on.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: There are two or three things that are wrong with news channels in my experience.
[Guest]: One, of course, it is a lack of imagination of editorial leaders and journalists.
[Guest]: Television in India, perhaps in the West as well, has been reduced to one reductionist
[Guest]: idea, right versus left.
[Guest]: So Kumle has a fight with Kohli, let's make it right versus left.
[Guest]: That's the Ayodhya issue, let's make it right versus left, which makes sense, because that
[Guest]: is a right versus left issue.
[Guest]: But Kumle versus Kohli is not a right versus left issue, but we end up converting everything
[Guest]: into a right versus left issue, because that's the only reductionist model television seems
[Guest]: to know.
[Guest]: So every evening you get two right-wingers, two left-wingers getting to scream at each
[Guest]: other over any issue.
[Guest]: But why aren't managements willing to spend on news gathering, on editorials, on sending
[Guest]: out correspondence to not just parts of the world, but parts of India?
[Guest]: Again, that is because we have legislated the subscription model to death in India.
[Guest]: When we were growing up and reading newspapers, there was this hope that one day you'd be
[Guest]: able to produce a magazine or a newspaper that wasn't aiming at a mass circulation,
[Guest]: that wasn't aiming at half a million or 250,000 buyers or readers, but was aimed at maybe
[Guest]: 20,000 high-quality readers, and would charge 100 rupees rather than 50 rupees or 20 rupees
[Guest]: per copy.
[Guest]: This is really the economist model, because you spend a lot of money buying The Economist,
[Guest]: irrespective of whether you live in Minnesota or Meerut.
[Guest]: But you read it because, well, The Economist has seen better days, but you read or read
[Guest]: The Economist because it gave you a certain value.
[Guest]: This model did not exist in India because our newspapers and magazines had an advertiser-driven
[Guest]: model.
[Guest]: But that was a conscious decision newspaper managements took as private sector entities.
[Guest]: In the case of television, the same model now exists, but it's been mandated by the
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: So, I'm not suggesting that news channel managements would not have taken the same
[Guest]: route.
[Guest]: They may well have.
[Guest]: But here, they don't even have a choice.
[Guest]: Because TRAI, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, which is a telecom regulator, it's
[Guest]: not a content manager, has been given the job over the past 12 odd years, I think, since
[Guest]: 2005 or 2006, of setting price caps on the bouquet you can buy from your DGH provider
[Guest]: or your cable provider or whoever delivers television channels to your house.
[Guest]: And they have priced it ridiculously low, without any understanding of what content
[Guest]: cost or what it takes to produce content.
[Guest]: And so, Balaji Telefilms rerunning old soap operas, cost of content zero, because they
[Guest]: all exist already.
[Guest]: And Amit Verma and Ashok Malik setting up a high quality news channel that wants to
[Guest]: send correspondence from everywhere from Iraq to America, which would cost a king's ransom.
[Guest]: We will both be under a ridiculous price cap.
[Guest]: And we will not be able to charge viewers what they would perhaps be willing to pay
[Guest]: for a high quality news channel.
[Guest]: And this is true for not just news, it's true for entertainment as well.
[Guest]: Because in the West, something like 70% of revenue for channels across the board comes
[Guest]: from subscribers, 30% comes from advertisers.
[Guest]: In India, it's the reverse, 36% comes from subscribers and 64% from advertisers.
[Guest]: In the case of news channels in India, just 10% of revenue comes from subscribers.
[Guest]: So most channels have simply given up on subscription and said, the figures are so ridiculously
[Guest]: low.
[Guest]: We may as well make our channel free and not even chase subscribers for those five rupees
[Guest]: or 10 rupees or whatever.
[Guest]: Make it free.
[Guest]: Let's make it part of the entertainment economy.
[Guest]: Let's entertain our viewers and get ads.
[Guest]: And so every evening, whether it's a right wing channel or a left wing channel or a center
[Guest]: channel or whatever you want to call it, it's all equally disappointing for a country of
[Guest]: such diversity, richness, intellectual depth, and media consumption.
[Amit Varma]: And typically, I imagine how a media market would work is that if there is a news channel
[Amit Varma]: or an entertainment channel, which doesn't necessarily want to be broad based, but which
[Amit Varma]: wants to appeal to a specific niche with specific tastes, all they would really have to do is
[Amit Varma]: figure out a price point which that niche is willing to pay for that content.
[Amit Varma]: And then if it is feasible, then produce content according to that.
[Amit Varma]: And what you're essentially saying is what these price caps do is they make that impossible.
[Amit Varma]: You can't charge over a certain number.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, even if there is a niche which is willing to pay more for higher quality
[Amit Varma]: content or even content of a particular type, they can't do that.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the channels, especially the news channels, are forced to just apply to
[Amit Varma]: the you know, take the easy way out, be lazy, not spend too much money on news gathering.
[Amit Varma]: Just pick up the you know, hot burning hashtag of the day from Twitter and set a debate around
[Amit Varma]: that and take the easy way out.
[Guest]: Precisely.
[Guest]: Now, let me again clarify that our newspapers and magazines do not have the burden of price
[Guest]: caps, but they have not followed the subscription route, they've stuck to the advertiser mass
[Guest]: circulation route.
[Guest]: But that I hope that is disappointing as well.
[Guest]: That is a conscious decision taken by private sector managements.
[Guest]: In the case of television, maybe the management should have taken the same decision all along,
[Guest]: I'm not denying that.
[Guest]: But there is a state or TRAI cap, which is what makes this different from what print
[Guest]: is doing.
[Guest]: What print is doing is also unforgivable.
[Guest]: But here in this case, there is a price cap in the case of television or in the case of
[Guest]: news television in particular.
[Guest]: And that is actually astonishing because it means that even if somebody wants to set up
[Guest]: a serious entertainment or children's programming, or of course, news channel, he finds he or
[Guest]: she finds the market and market conditions impossible to deal with, the TRAI will come
[Guest]: in the way of, of that actually happening.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my question for you.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, these price caps happened some 15-16 years ago, right?
[Amit Varma]: So what was sort of the thinking behind them and who are the interest groups that benefit
[Guest]: from these price caps?
[Guest]: You know, what happened was in the early 1990s, when whole neighborhoods in our big cities
[Guest]: began to be wired up using cable networks, the local cable operator was your local goon,
[Guest]: who actually jumped from building to building, almost literally, with a wire and wired up
[Guest]: whole cities.
[Guest]: Now, over the years, some of those networks became consolidated, became semi respectable
[Guest]: businesses, but the cable business broadly, in this country remains one run by musclemen,
[Guest]: local, local thugs, local political fixers, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So the idea back then, a very noble idea was that you must have a uniform pricing strategy
[Guest]: so that a cable operator in neighborhood X, where access and competition is limited, will
[Guest]: not be able to profiteer and cheat a consumer, as opposed to a cable operator in neighborhood
[Guest]: Z, where there is more competition and access is easier.
[Guest]: So that sounds a very good idea, and you need to have a market regulator, and the market
[Guest]: regulator has to keep cable operators or DTH providers and so on and so forth under control.
[Guest]: That makes perfect sense.
[Guest]: But the mechanism that TRAI and the government adopted was to set price caps on channels,
[Guest]: because or rather price caps on bouquets of channels offered by cable operators and other
[Guest]: service providers, and that in effect became a price cap on a channel.
[Guest]: So in preventing or attempting to prevent the cable operator from cheating the consumer,
[Guest]: which is a legitimate aspiration and something which needs to be done, you ended up telling
[Guest]: the channel that you can't charge above a certain price.
[Guest]: And if you can't charge above a certain price, I don't care whether your content costs less
[Guest]: than that price or more than that price, I'm not going to allow you to charge above that.
[Guest]: So you wanted to regulate the cable operator, you ended up punishing the creative economy,
[Guest]: or in this case, the news media space.
[Guest]: And we left 10 years on the line with, frankly, completely disappointing and rubbish news
[Guest]: television.
[Guest]: So a well-meaning bureaucratic intervention, like many well-meaning bureaucratic interventions,
[Guest]: years down the line leads to something very, very different.
[Amit Varma]: So they essentially wanted to control the cable mafias and what instead, the unseen
[Amit Varma]: effect, however, was that the quality of television suffered and consumers suffered and that whole
[Amit Varma]: paternalistic thinking behind price caps, which if something is valuable, let's make
[Amit Varma]: sure it's not too expensive.
[Guest]: Yes, you see a dumbing down of television across the board, again, not just news.
[Guest]: So you actually have consumers who are spending much more on, let's say, a Netflix or various
[Guest]: platforms that they access using the net, they're spending much more on one month subscription
[Guest]: of any one of those platforms than they do, perhaps in a year subscription of cable or
[Guest]: DTH.
[Guest]: Absolutely, I mean,
[Guest]: And they don't end up watching cable or DTH.
[Guest]: So who suffers?
[Guest]: The Indian channels don't get the high quality viewers they want, they don't get satisfaction
[Guest]: from producing content that is truly world class, or even respectable.
[Guest]: And they're losing their key subscribers or viewers, really, to digital.
[Amit Varma]: Which is crazy.
[Amit Varma]: And like, just speaking for myself, I spent 650 a month on my Netflix subscription.
[Amit Varma]: I think my Hotstar comes to about 100 bucks a month or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact is, all this money could have been going to Indian channels, if they had
[Amit Varma]: actually been able to spend money on content acquisition, which they would have been able
[Amit Varma]: to if they'd been allowed to charge prices for it, because at some point or the other,
[Amit Varma]: this niche that exists, which Netflix and Hotstar have now jumped upon and Amazon Prime
[Amit Varma]: have jumped upon, would have been available to our channels much earlier, except they
[Amit Varma]: weren't allowed to reach this niche.
[Amit Varma]: So to carry on from there, my further question then is that if this is how things are, what
[Amit Varma]: hope do you have that things will change?
[Amit Varma]: What can drive change?
[Amit Varma]: What can drive, say, TRAI to remove these price caps?
[Amit Varma]: What are the interest groups in play that would now prevent it from happening?
[Amit Varma]: What's in the way of change?
[Guest]: Well, I guess the cable operators will be one very strong lobby to resist this because
[Guest]: they would not want agency taken from them and moving on to either subscribers or to
[Guest]: channels themselves.
[Guest]: But frankly, digital technology is changing everything because digital is just one more
[Guest]: way of delivering content like wired cable is.
[Guest]: So either you bring both of them under price caps, which is completely ridiculous because
[Guest]: I don't think Netflix would want to be under TRAI price cap, either you bring them both
[Guest]: under price caps, or you free them both.
[Guest]: It doesn't make sense otherwise, you know, technology has raced ahead of all of us.
[Guest]: So you can't decide that I will have price caps on content delivered through one pipe,
[Guest]: but no price caps on content delivered through another pipe.
[Amit Varma]: That's in a sense, that's analogous to what's happening with Uber and black and yellow cabs,
[Amit Varma]: that you had, you know, black and yellow cabs, the supply restricted with, you know, licensing
[Amit Varma]: regulations and so on, price ceilings and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And that market has been completely disrupted with Uber and now you can't turn the clock
[Amit Varma]: back and the same thing seems to be happening in terms of audiovisual content.
[Guest]: Yes, I mean, obviously, Uber is a slightly different example, but yes, I get what you're
[Guest]: trying to say.
[Guest]: But here, digital has completely changed the market anyway.
[Guest]: Digital has also had a collateral impact in that, it's thanks to the internet release
[Guest]: so much of free content online, some of it dubious and some of it fake, but much of it
[Guest]: not fake, but still available free.
[Guest]: That the news business in India, that the model of the news business in India is under
[Guest]: serious interrogation anyway, even without this price cap nonsense.
[Guest]: So frankly, I don't know whether the news television business in India can now be rescued
[Guest]: because even if price caps are lifted, people have got used to this opium or this opiate
[Guest]: of free content.
[Guest]: And once you get used to that, it takes a long time and a lot of trust for you to go
[Guest]: back to a subscription-based model, where you will pay a good amount of money every
[Guest]: month with the assurance that the person you're paying that money to will deliver quality
[Guest]: content and will not just deliver quality content for one month and then change his
[Guest]: or her mind.
[Guest]: So I'm afraid much of the debate we're having today, I wish we'd had it three or four years
[Guest]: ago, five or six years ago, I think the advent of the internet and the ferocious rollout
[Guest]: of digital technologies and online platforms may have put much of this debate behind us.
[Guest]: And the news business in India may be under a very serious threat.
[Unknown]: Some of our news channels may be beyond being rescued.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point.
[Amit Varma]: And just speaking of myself, though, you know, a counter view to that would be that I don't
[Amit Varma]: watch any news television at all, I simply can't stand to.
[Amit Varma]: However, if there was an intelligent news channel, I might give it a shot.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore there is a niche so you know, you never know if you remove the price caps,
[Guest]: what could happen.
[Guest]: I'm actually more hopeful for, for radio opening up for news.
[Guest]: Because you see, news on television ends up being not what you hear, but what you watch.
[Guest]: So people need to be dressed up, people need to be good looking people need to be all sorts
[Guest]: of stuff which you don't need to be, if you really asked me, but radio can have you and
[Guest]: me sitting in whatever shorts and jeans in our homes or wherever we are, or in the studio,
[Guest]: having a conversation.
[Guest]: And it's also a less expensive platform or delivery mechanism than television because
[Guest]: it simply requires less equipment.
[Guest]: I'm actually hopeful for private radio, news shows, news commentaries, news discussions.
[Guest]: Not just news per se, because news per se is not easily available.
[Guest]: But it's what happens after the news break, which is really what we're talking about.
[Guest]: And whether we can get something more intelligent than just four people screaming at each other
[Guest]: every evening at 9pm.
[Guest]: So I'm hopeful radio will, will do some of that magic.
[Amit Varma]: Ashok, what you're saying is absolutely music to my ears.
[Amit Varma]: And if you could see what I'm wearing now, I think you'd know exactly why.
[Amit Varma]: Ashok, thanks for doing this, man.
[Amit Varma]: I really appreciate this.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: To read Ashok's piece, which inspired this episode, search for an article titled Why
[Amit Varma]: Are Indian News Channels So Disappointing in the Hindustan Times.
[Amit Varma]: You can also follow Ashok on Twitter at Malik Ashok.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can also read my blog India Uncut at indiancut.com, where I upload all my personal work.
[Amit Varma]: And if you enjoyed this episode, you can browse our archival episodes at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is episode 27, and the previous 26 episodes offer an interesting snapshot of an unseen
[Amit Varma]: India.
[Amit Varma]: Goodbye for now.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene in the unseen, check out this exciting new podcast
[Amit Varma]: from IndusVox Media called Keeping It Queer.
[Amit Varma]: Keeping It Queer is hosted by my friend Naveen Narona, and he profiles LGBT people from all
[Amit Varma]: across the country, and some of the stories are really poignant.
[Unknown]: Keep It Queer.